Blog post: Analysing Quarkus Native startup RSS (#1755)
quarkusio/quarkusio.github.io: _posts/2023-07-24-native-startup-rss-troubleshooting.adoc

is what was causing the increase in RSS consumption.
In other words, even though both HotSpot and SubstrateVM experience higher allocations,
SubstrateVM's fixed thread-local allocation heap chunk sizes make this more apparent,
compared to the dynamic thread-local allocation logic in HotSpot.

Since then, improvements were made to the components that caused the extra object allocation.
We were able to detect the changes that had caused these extra allocations
by looking at the components that appeared in the stacktrace leading to slow allocations,
and inspecting updates that had happened in those components.
In this case, updates to the SmallRye configuration handling at startup caused the regression.

[NOTE]
====
The stacktraces that cause slow object allocations give us an approximation on the components that cause memory usage increase.
There could be situations where the stacktrace leading to a slow allocation is perfectly valid,
but due to the non-deterministic nature of object allocation,
the stacktrace just happens to be the one that caused a new heap chunk to be allocated.
However, if you see multiple stacktraces in the same area,

> that's probably a good hint that something in that stacktrace needs to be investigated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that's probably a good hint that something in that area needs to be investigated.
```

and then we generate flamegraphs with the recorded data:

[source,bash]
----
$ sudo perf record -e syscalls:sys_enter_mmap --call-graph dwarf -- getting-started/target/getting-started-1.0.0-SNAPSHOT-runner -Xmx64m
...
2023-07-21 10:13:11,304 INFO  [io.quarkus] (main) getting-started 1.0.0-SNAPSHOT native (powered by Quarkus 2.7.6.Final) started in 0.023s. Listening on: http://0.0.0.0:8080

$ perf script -i perf.data > out.stacks
$ /opt/FlameGraph/stackcollapse-perf.pl < out.stacks | /opt/FlameGraph/flamegraph.pl \
   --color=mem \
   --title="mmap Flame Graph" \
   --countname="calls" > out.svg
----

[NOTE]
====
The native executable above was created passing in
`-Dquarkus.native.debug.enabled` and `-Dquarkus.native.additional-build-args=-H:-DeleteLocalSymbols`
as extra build flags.
====

The areas of interest in the flamegraphs are those stacktraces that contain `ApplicationImpl.doStart()` method call.
If you focus the flamegraph on that method,
and then click on `Search` at the top right and type `allocate`,
you can observe which of the `sys_enter_mmap` system calls are related to native heap memory allocation.

> These allocations are for heap chunks, each of which is 1MB,

Reviewer 2: Maybe its worth mentioning it's no longer 1MB and has since been changed to 512KB

Author: Added a small comment around the upcoming change to reduce it.

which are part of the thread local allocation logic in GraalVM’s runtime engine, SubstrateVM
(further details in the
https://quarkus.io/guides/native-reference#rss[Quarkus native reference guide]
).

For Quarkus 2.7.6.Final, the flamegraph looks like this:

image::rss-before-mmap.svg[startup rss startup flamegraph for Quarkus 2.7.6.Final]

And here's a screenshot of the mmap calls that relate to heap chunk allocations:

image::rss-before-mmap-allocate.png[heap chunk allocation related mmap calls for Quarkus 2.7.6.Final]

Observing the number of times `allocate` is highlighted above, i.e. 2, we can say that the `main` thread in Quarkus 2.7.6.Final allocates roughly 2MB of heap chunks.

For Quarkus 2.13.4.Final, the flamegraph looks like this:

image::rss-after-mmap.svg[startup rss startup flamegraph for Quarkus 2.13.4.Final]

Focusing on the same area, we observe that the `allocate` count is 5 in this case, so the `main` thread allocates roughly 5MB of heap chunks:

image::rss-after-mmap-allocate.png[heap chunk allocation related mmap calls for Quarkus 2.13.4.Final]

The increase in object allocation at runtime startup between these two Quarkus versions,

> combined with the idiosyncrasies of how thread local allocation works in SubstrateVM,

Reviewer 2: Maybe it's worth elaborating on "idiosyncrasies". For example, explaining that Hotspot has dynamic TLAB resizing whereas SVM has a one-size-tries-to-fit-all approach, which is why the issue only pops up in native mode even though both modes experience more allocations.

Author: This has been solved in the latest update. In expanding https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkusio.github.io/pull/1755#discussion_r1272268418, I've explained how the slow/fast path work and the TLA logic in SubstrateVM. I've then expanded this paragraph further.

which is the JFR the event that would have highlighted discrepancies in the Quarkus versions compared above.
Unfortunately, the Quarkus versions tested here are not compatible with this GraalVM version,
but we can give it a go with the latest Quarkus version to see what comes out.

First, we build the native Quarkus application with JFR support:

[source,bash]
----
$ ./mvnw package -DskipTests -Dquarkus.native.monitoring=jfr -Dnative
----

To obtain `jdk.ObjectAllocationInNewTLAB` events,
a custom JFC configuration file is required.
We use `jfr configure` to generate it:

[source,bash]
----
$ $JAVA_HOME/bin/jfr configure jdk.ObjectAllocationInNewTLAB#enabled=true --output newtlab.jfc
----

Then, we start the Quarkus native executable with the necessary JFR flags:

[source,bash]
----
$ getting-started/target/getting-started-1.0.0-SNAPSHOT-runner -XX:+FlightRecorder -XX:StartFlightRecording=settings=newtlab.jfc,filename=recording.jfr -Xmx64m
...
2023-07-21 12:25:33,739 INFO  [io.quarkus] (main) getting-started 1.0.0-SNAPSHOT native (powered by Quarkus 3.2.1.Final) started in 0.019s. Listening on: http://0.0.0.0:8080
----

After shutting down Quarkus,

> we can use https://adoptium.net/jmc[Adoptium's Eclipse Mission Control],

Reviewer 2: Just in case user's are unfamiliar with JMC, it might be good to mention that you can see user-friendly flamegraphs of this JFR event (similar to what you obtained with perf and eBPF).

Author: I'm adding a JMC screenshot but I don't think the flamegraphs in JMC add anything productive in this case. It assumes each object allocation is a different flamegraph, because a different object is allocated, and show doesn't show them together in the same way you saw with perf/eBPF.

Reviewer 2: Do you mean you are only able to see the stacktrace of a single event at a time? If you click on the event itself or highlight a series of events, you can view them all together.  Is this what you mean? 
![image](https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkusio.github.io/assets/35396843/9178478b-a3b8-472c-b53e-8401e1346d60)

The behavior you describe (viewing one class at a time) is also possible though:
![image](https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkusio.github.io/assets/35396843/52d13fe5-baa4-4b3b-8d84-1dc1ce488f06)

Author: Ah ok. I couldn't get to see that initially. I had to click back on the "Event browser" and then select the event type to see them all together. I'll try to add that to the blog.

Reviewer 2: Yup, I agree the UI is a little clunky. I do wish there was a way to quickly "select all". But as far as I know there isn't :(

Author: If you select multiple events at the same time, e.g. all events coming from `main` thread, the flamegraph expands to cover all of those, which as expected all root at the `ApplicationImpl.doStart()` method. I added this screenshot to the blog post.

---
layout: post
title: 'Analysing Quarkus Native startup RSS consumption'
date: 2023-07-24
tags: native rss jfr
synopsis: 'Use Linux native tooling and JFR to understand Quarkus Native startup RSS consumption'
author: galderz
---
:imagesdir: /assets/images/posts/native-startup-rss-troubleshooting

During the development of Quarkus 2.13,
we discovered that there was a startup degradation in native mode.
One of the key aspects of this degradation was that RSS consumption on start up had gone up by about 10-15% compared to Quarkus 2.7.
In this blog post you will learn how
https://quarkus.io/guides/native-reference#rss[these Quarkus native RSS consumption debugging techniques]
were used to diagnose this issue.

> You will also learn about recent updates in GraalVM that make doing this kind of analysis more convenient.

Author: Yeah that should be updated. @roberttoyonaga would you like to have a go at updating it? The idea would be to go through the [native reference guide](https://quarkus.io/guides/native-reference) and see where and how JFR can provide alternative methods to debug some of the issues highlighted here.

In our environment, the RSS consumption had gone up to about ~36M, roughly a 10% increase:

[source,bash]
----
$ getting-started/target/getting-started-1.0.0-SNAPSHOT-runner -Xmx64m
...
2023-07-21 10:24:38,529 INFO  [io.quarkus] (main) getting-started 1.0.0-SNAPSHOT native (powered by Quarkus 2.13.4.Final) started in 0.027s. Listening on: http://0.0.0.0:8080

$ ps -p $(pidof getting-started-1.0.0-SNAPSHOT-runner) -o rss=
36608
----

Early on we did some investigation to see if the GraalVM version used had an impact but it did not.
In other words, using the same GraalVM version to build both versions resulted in similar differences.

Profiling the startup using the JVM mode is something we also tried,
and we could observe some slight increase in heap usage,
but in JVM mode, the RSS increase was not apparent at runtime.
So, the challenge for us was to make sense of the RSS increase that seemed to only affect native mode,
and that was specific to the Quarkus code.

Following
https://www.brendangregg.com/FlameGraphs/memoryflamegraphs.html[Brendan Gregg’s Memory Leak (and Growth) Flame Graphs guide] on a Linux environment,

> we were able to narrow down the issue to the shape of the flamegraphs for the `mmap` system calls.

Author: Initially I wasn't sure where the RSS increase was coming from. When I found the article, I went one by one trying all the system calls that were presented there and learning how to generate flamegraphs for each. When I did that I realised that the `mmap` flamegraph showed a lot of calls which then I started digging into the SVM logic that was triggering it. This flamegraph was also the one that presented differences between the two Quarkus versions.

I could have probably used `strace` to see which system calls are the ones that are called the most, and then use the article to see how to generate flamegraphs for those that are used the most.

Shall I elaborate this in the blog post?

> we were able to narrow down the issue to the shape of the flamegraphs for the `mmap` system calls.

Reviewer: Yes, please. No need to say much, just say that RSS can only be increased through system calls and that you started looking for them and that's how you ended up focusing on `mmap`.

To obtain the flamegraphs, we capture the `sys_enter_mmap` system call events with `perf record`,

> and then we generate flamegraphs with the recorded data:

Author: Let in the blog post I'm explaining the role of `mmap` in SVM heap allocation when I talk about slow/fast allocations. Shall I move that explanation upfront?

> and then we generate flamegraphs with the recorded data:

Reviewer: No, I think that the current content with the possible addition of https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkusio.github.io/pull/1755#discussion_r1274588860 is enough. Thanks!

).

For Quarkus 2.7.6.Final, the flamegraph looks like this:

image::rss-before-mmap.svg[startup rss startup flamegraph for Quarkus 2.7.6.Final]

And here's a screenshot of those mmap calls that are related heap chunk allocations:

image::rss-before-mmap-allocate.png[heap chunk allocation related mmap calls for Quarkus 2.7.6.Final]

If we count the number of times `allocate` is highlighted above, the number is 2.
So, we can roughly say that the `main` thread in Quarkus 2.7.6.Final will allocate 2MB of heap chunks.

For Quarkus 2.13.4.Final, the flamegraph looks like this:

image::rss-after-mmap.svg[startup rss startup flamegraph for Quarkus 2.13.4.Final]

If we focus on the same area, we observe the count is 5, so that would be roughly 5MB of allocated heap chunks for the `main` thread:

image::rss-after-mmap-allocate.png[heap chunk allocation related mmap calls for Quarkus 2.13.4.Final]

The increase in object allocation between these two Quarkus versions at runtime startup,
combined with the idiosyncrasies of how thread local allocation works in SubstrateVM,
is what caused this increase in RSS consumption.

> Since then, improvements were made to the components that caused the extra object allocation.

Author: Right, I left that information out.

The idea is to look at the components that appear in the stacktrace leading to the slow allocation and see what changes have happened in those. This is not a perfect science since it could happen that a slow allocation results from somewhere that is not responsible for the increase (by luck), but it gives some good hints. In this case it was changes in how the SmallRye configuration was handled at runtime.

Shall I add something along those lines?

By Quarkus version 2.13.7.Final, the RSS consumption on startup was back to previous levels.
We are also looking into ways to improve thread local allocation logic in SubstrateVM.

=== `ObjectAllocationInNewTLAB` JFR event

> Another improvement since we carried out this investigation can be found in the area of tooling.
> At the time, the only tooling we could really use here was `perf` or `eBPF`, which is only available in Linux.
> Additions to the emitted JFR events for native applications in latest GraalVM Community versions include the `jdk.ObjectAllocationInNewTLAB` event,
> which is the JFR the event that would have highlighted discrepancies in the Quarkus versions compared above.
> Unfortunately, the Quarkus versions tested here are not compatible with this GraalVM version,
> but we can give it a go with the latest Quarkus version to see what comes out.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As newer versions of GraalVM implement https://github.com/oracle/graal/issues/5410[more and more JFR events] in native mode it also becomes easier to analyse Quarkus application performance. 
For instance the recent release of GraalVM for JDK 17/20 add support for the `jdk.ObjectAllocationInNewTLAB` event which would have highlighted the discrepancies in the Quarkus versions compared above.
Unfortunately, the Quarkus versions tested here are not compatible with this GraalVM version,
but we can give it a go with the latest Quarkus version to see what comes out.
```

> First, build the Quarkus native with JFR:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, we build the native Quarkus application with JFR support:
```

[source,bash]
----
$ ./mvnw package -DskipTests -Dquarkus.native.monitoring=jfr -Dnative
----

To obtain `jdk.ObjectAllocationInNewTLAB` events,
a custom JFC configuration file is required.

> `jfr configure` can be used to generate it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We use `jfr configure` to generate it:
```

[source,bash]
----
$ $JAVA_HOME/bin/jfr configure jdk.ObjectAllocationInNewTLAB#enabled=true --output newtlab.jfc
----

> Then, start Quarkus native executable with the necessary JFR flags:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, we start the Quarkus native executable with the necessary JFR flags:
```

[source,bash]
----
$ getting-started/target/getting-started-1.0.0-SNAPSHOT-runner -XX:+FlightRecorder -XX:StartFlightRecording=settings=newtlab.jfc,filename=recording.jfr -Xmx64m
...
2023-07-21 12:25:33,739 INFO  [io.quarkus] (main) getting-started 1.0.0-SNAPSHOT native (powered by Quarkus 3.2.1.Final) started in 0.019s. Listening on: http://0.0.0.0:8080
----

After shutting down Quarkus,
we can use https://adoptium.net/jmc[Adoptium's Eclipse Mission Control],
or even the `jfr` command itself to visualize the `jdk.ObjectAllocationInNewTLAB` events:

[source,bash]
----
$ $JAVA_HOME/bin/jfr print --events ObjectAllocationInNewTLAB --stack-depth 100 recording.jfr
----

> Amongst the output you will find events such as the following,
> which are related to the flamegraph stacktraces that we highlighted above:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Inspecting the output we see events related to the flamegraph stacktraces that we highlighted above:
```

[source,bash]
----

> jdk.ObjectAllocationInNewTLAB {

Reviewer: In this example we don't see the call to `OSCommittedMemoryProvider.allocate()` though, could you perhaps use an event including this as well, or is this something not shown in the JFR event for some reason?

Author: The discrepancy is due where the JFR event is emitted vs when the `mmap` system call happens. The JFR event gets emitted after the `slowPathNew*` method has finished, and this method is the one that calls `OSCommittedMemoryProvider.allocate()` before the event fires.

I think the JFR event is fine as is, and don't think there's a need to add a new event. However, what I can maybe do is focus the user on searching for `slowPathNew` methods, and that way the similarities between the two approaches should be smaller. WDYT?

Reviewer: Yes, either explain the difference, or move the focus to `slowPathNew` (explaining why it's important), it might be obvious to people familiar with GC, but I guess it's not for most people :)

Author: The new updates contain a detailed explanation of the slow/fast allocation paths.

as extra build flags.
====

`mmap` calls happen for a variety of reasons,
but in the context of this blog post,
we're interested in those `mmap` calls that are triggered by object allocations.
Not every object allocation triggers an `mmap` call.
Instead, each thread in SubstrateVM will allocate a heap chunk using `mmap` when the first object is allocated,
and it will use this heap chunk as long as there's space for further objects allocated in the same thread.
When the heap chunk is full,
the thread will request a new heap chunk using `mmap`.
This pattern is called thread-location allocation.
HotSpot has a similar feature as well,
but there the heap chunk size is dynamically computed depending on multiple factors,
while on SubstrateVM the size is fixed.
At the time of writing, the default heap chunk size is 1MB,
but an upcoming change will make it 512KB instead.

We describe the object allocation as fast when the thread has a heap chunk cached and there's enough space for the object.
We describe the object allocation as slow when the thread needs to request a new heap chunk via the `mmap` system call to satisfy the object allocation.

> This latter type of allocations are the most interesting ones for us,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Slow allocations are the most interesting in this case,
```

> because they give us an rough indication of which allocations are pushing the number of heap chunks up,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
because they give us a rough indication of which allocations are pushing the number of heap chunks up,
```

and therefore are pushing the RSS consumption up.

> In SubstrateVM, slow allocation path stacktraces contain `com.oracle.svm.core.genscavenge.ThreadLocalAllocation` class invocations to methods with `slowPathNew` prefix.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In SubstrateVM, stacktraces of the slow allocation path contain invocations to methods defined in the `com.oracle.svm.core.genscavenge.ThreadLocalAllocation` class that contain the `slowPathNew` prefix in their name .
```

E.g. `slowPathNewInstance` for plain objects or `slowPathNewArray` for arrays.

The areas of interest in the flamegraphs are those stacktraces that contain `ApplicationImpl.doStart()` method call,
which are invoked from the `main` thread.

> We want to find out how many slow path allocations that are visible in these stacktraces.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We want to find out how many slow path allocations are visible in these stacktraces.
```
